Deciphering genetic causes of idiopathic pregnancy loss from
an embryonic perspective

S Buonaiuto1, I Di Biase2, V Aleotti3, G Damaggio1,5, P D'Ambrosio2, O Catapano2, A Ravaei4, G Esposito3, M Chierici6, M Pulijala7, Q Ayub7, C Furlanello6, E Garrison6, N Soranzo7, A Capalbo8, M Rubini4, S Di Biase3, V Colonna1
1CNR, IGB, Napoli, Italy, 2MeriGen Research s.r.l., R&D, Napoli, Italy, 3University of Ferrara, SBCS, Ferrara, Italy, 4 FBK, MPBA, Povo, Italy, 5Mon, School of Science, Bandar Sunway, Malaysia, 6UCSC, Genomics Institute, Santa Cruz, CA, 7Wellcome Sanger Institute, Human Genetics, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 8Igenomix, R&D, Marostica, Italy

Pregnancy Loss (PL), the spontaneous termination of a pregnancy before 24 weeks of gestation, occurs in 10-15% of pregnancies. PL is often the result of chromosomal aneuploidies of the gametes. It can also have non random genetic causes. Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) detects variants of several thousand base pairs while targeted resequencing resolves point mutations. Both are currently the most accurate methods for the genetic analysis of PL, but are not sensitive to small variants (CGH), or do not target those located in non-coding regulatory regions (resequencing).

We aim to identify small-size genetic variants likely to cause PL using a predictive model integrating sequence data with functional annotations and gene networks relevant to embryonic development. In this pilot study we analyze whole-genome sequence of embryos from 70 women diagnosed with PL.

About 20% of collected samples were suitable for sequencing, the rest presenting aneuploidies or quality issues. Sequenced samples have on average 4M high-quality small variants of which 0.1% are ranked as having a highly deleterious impact while 1.7% have a moderate impact, and 2% low. Within genic regions we identified three to ten genetic variants per sample of high (splice-donor) and moderate (missense) impact with frequency lower than 5% in gnomAD and 1000 Genomes populations, located in twenty-eight genes involved in early embryonic development. Four genes with these variants are involved in the gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor pathway and two in the integrin signalling pathway. Notably, four samples have multiple hetrozygous missense mutations at four sites in LAMA5, a gene that regulates the attachment, migration, and organization of cells into tissues during embryonic development.

These first results will be corroborated with a more comprehensive analysis that fully implements a predictive model and includes regulatory regions. We will validate results by comparison to a biobank of DNA leftovers from euploid embryo transfers cycles resulting in clinical miscarriage.

We demonstrated that whole genome sequencing can help to clarify the causes of PL and provides essential indications for the realization of a larger study. 
